---
title: sermon of the baphomet
date: 2026-02-25T12:30:00.000Z
categories:
  - prose
---
it was a warm September night. it had been rainy in the afternoon, but had stopped by the evening. Anish sat by the river alone. the parades had all ended, and the paraders had all left hours ago. there wouldn't be any more for a few weeks. absent the drums and the fanfare, it felt even quieter. 

<!-- more -->

the moon peeked and hid behind the clouds. he stared absently at the Ganesh idols. they kept swimming through the current, their long supply courtesy of the cityfolk upstream. they were accompanied by garlands, loose leaves, and other prayerstuffs. he wondered what exactly he was feeling in the moment. was it a religious melancholy -- the exhaustion of a festival well celebrated? it was that for sure, but there was also something else.

envy. the statues swam to the ocean, that infinite ocean. he saw them, and he wished - "oh the ocean. the infinite ocean. were you to swallow me with these idols, and next year, with the rest of them, birth me anew. if i had another chance, another year" and so on he dreamt. what would he have done in another year? would he have asked out the girl he liked? surely it would have still been unsuccessful. would he have performed better on the national exams? maybe, but that wouldn't be enough to get him out of the country. his parents couldn't afford any of the exams or applications that could get him out. and living here was so insufferable. the damned air, the damned water. if only he could ride on one of the idols from gulf to gulf, and be born again in one of those middle-east countries where the water is never dirty and the air never foul. 

he opened his eyes again, and looked more carefully at the idols. they would dutifully melt some way. perhaps if he saw his duty too, if he followed the path of the divine, he too would be cleansed anew. but he looked again, and saw amid the debris a different idol. this one was pitch black, as if coated in crude oil. it sullied the water around it, and glistened under the faint moonlight. it was a most profane statue. a goat in a horde of elephants, it stood out like a sore thumb. it responded to the peaceful half smiles around it with a maleficent gleam. it was skinnier, winged, menacing. neither male nor female, but distinctly fiendish. as he got on his knees to move away, he saw the foul idol drift away from the river parade. it turned towards him, with its wicked smile, and landed onshore.

---

go no further. do not be afraid, i mean no harm to you. i hear you and your pains, your struggles and your agonies. the gods on high do not hear you. and the ones that hear do not respond. they worry about the gyrations of the planets and the recomposition of societies. they do not have any concern about the trifle events of the lives of you or your family or peers. your prayers fall on deaf ears. the Napoleons of the 21st century have already been born in the families of aristocrats, warlords, and nobles. in the constructions of fate you are no more significant than an ant. and yet, i bring no promise to fulfill your prayers. it is only meagre devils and djinns that embarks on such deceptive endeavours. i am here to give you my wisdom, and a hope for a different future.

hear my words, and remember them. think of this when you go to sleep. think of it when you wake up. think of it when you are in agony, think of it when you are in ecstasy. meditate upon it in the confines of your bedroom, meditate upon it sitting on a wide open field. dream of it with your eyes closed. sketch it with your eyes open. let its visions colour the canvas of your mind. let its song keep you awake at night in fascination. inculcate it, embody it, enact it, manifest it, and you will be the most productive you could ever be.

the truth is this. as is above, so is below. as is above, so is below. as is above, so is below. repeat it again, learn it in your heart. as is above, so is below. have you seen the grand golden arches? the high towers devoted to the gods of finance and commerce? the idols to the spirits of freedom and justice, unity and progress? the mansions lined with gold and diamonds? the ships and planes built for luxury alone? have you smelt the most fragrant of perfumes, eaten the sweetest exotic fruits? read the most eloquent of poems? watched the most gruesome of horrors from the front seat? puppeteered the joy and suffering of millions with your own two hands? led armies of soldiers to their early graves? watched the planet crumble into strife and despair with your own two eyes while being caressed by a harem of the most pristine beauties? 

you have not, i know you have not. perhaps you do not want this today, but there are many whom the heavens has doomed to this fate. there are many who have achieved this, and when they have, they come to the doorstep of my temple. they cry and beg and kneel to me, for *more*. to have more than their neighbours, only a little more. they are foul, ungrateful beings. for this more they bring their wives and children to the altar. for this more they bring the children of many others. for this more they writhe and agonise more than the enslaved prisoner. for this more they cry and write poems of despair. for this more they attract upon themselves the hatred of their servants. for this more they maladapt and spiral into destructive behaviours, till they bring about their early demise.

the truth is this. there is no pyramid with a top and a bottom. these hierarchies are created by the cult of _more_ and those envious of the cult. they want more of more, and more of more of more. and they only see those with a bit more than them, so they want a bit more than a bit more. and they will do a bit more for a bit more than a bit more. a bit more of work. a bit more of crime. a bit more of under-the-table dealings. a bit more of scrubbing the ledgers. a bit more of lying, a bit more of betraying. a bit more of assaulting and killing. a bit more of murdering innocent children, and a bit more of appeasing those who do. 

the truth is this. the cultists of _more_ are petulant and hysterical. they call children petulant to draw attention away from their caprice. they call women hysterical to make their own drunken untruths sound somber. they call cynics liars to hide the purposelessness of their own endeavours. they are fathers of none, and insofar as they have children they cannot father them. they make businesses and industries to manipulate you into subservience to their cult. they make laws to make their theft look like business. they make loopholes to excuse themselves from being punished for their treacherous pursuits. they run and hide like paltry criminals. the only difference between the petty criminal and the jet-faring investment banker is that the latter isn't _caught_. the coloniser of yore was called an enterpriser. the despot before him was called a child of the divine. none of them are any higher than the pithiest of beggars. they are all meat and flesh on bones, and they bleed and wither the way everyone else does. and they come to me crying with their bargains, and i give them but illusions to pleasure in their despair.

the truth is this. the hierarchies before you are meaningless. they are already meaningless. the state, the enterprise, money and land. they mean nothing at all. they are governed as much from below as they are from above. there is no use for a billion dollars if the most expensive thing it can buy is grain. there is no use for a hundred acres of land if no one is willing to build on it. there is no state or enterprise that can exist without the guidance and labour of the littlest of citizens. if you were to leave, if all of you were to back out, if everyone wished to return to the state of _less_ -- the state, the economy, these cycle of abuse and exploitation would collapse as a whole. you service hollow idols, idols that polish themselves continuously in gold and silver to hide the fact that there is nothing inside. advertisement and media, beauty and vice, comfort and eternal youth. the cult of _more_ lies to you, but it also lies to itself. if it does not lie to itself, if it does not establish itself as more than you, than the cult has accomplished nothing and will implode on its own terms.

the truth is this. there are three thousand, nine hundred, and two planets with life in the milky way. out of them no more than a hundred have sentient life. out of those no more than fifteen have intelligent life that has harnessed electricity. ten more had done so in the past. not a single one of them invented war. not a single one of them invented private enterprise. not a single one of them killed or maimed another over superfluous luxuries. not a single one of them have a word for greed. humans, alone, are built in such a vile way that they have spent millennia hurting each other and their planet in pursuit of this bestial vice. for everyone else the distinction between intelligent and mere life comes from their overwhelming desire to act only in harmony with their own.

this is my truth to you. search for what makes your heart happy. there is no greatness ordained from above worth your respect. strive to make yourself and the people around you content. do not yearn for the stars, they only want to burn you and laugh as you fall to the ground. know your power, know your influence. the paper punching empty suits cannot create, they can only trade others' creations. you can create. so create for the good world. create for the creators. not for the leeches who only yearn for more.

---

as the statue stopped speaking, Anish fled the riverbank. it started to rain again. he looked back for a moment, afraid that it would chase him. the rain slowly washed the sludge off of it. under the shiny black coating he saw glimmers of an equally lustrous red.